1
DAWNVIEW HIGH SCHOOL
PROSPECTUS
HISTORY AND ETHOS
BADGE : The gold cinquefoil represents Primrose. The bar of two white lines echoes the
Germiston City Coat of Arms and represents Germiston and its importance as a railway junction.
The green lower half of the badge stands for growth and development.
The need for an English high school in the northern suburbs led to the establishment of Dawnview
High under the headmastership of Dr Hudson in 1962 and Mr. Z. Annandale in 1963. The
school of 425 pupils was temporarily housed in "Die President Laerskool" until the present
building was occupied in 1966.
Mr. H. Cunningham took up the headmaster's post in 1970 when Mr W. Spruyt was appointed to
Benoni High after his year of office at Dawnview. At the end of March 1986 Mr. Cunningham retired
and in January 1987 Mr. O'Dougherty took over the principal's post. He resigned in March 1992.
Mrs. A. Murray was appointed as Principal in November 1992. She is known for having turned
the school around and became the best principal among her peers.
1965 was a year of firsts. The first head boy and head girl were elected; the first group of
students was entered for the matriculation examination; the school magazine was printed for the
first time and the first major production, a musical review, was staged. Despite the inadequate
sports facilities, we won the Inter-High Athletics Competition, our U13 netball team won the finals
for the second time and our first rugby team was moulded into an effective unit.
The school was officially opened on 25 February 1967 by Mr. AJ. Koen, Director of Education, and
has had a history of proud successes academically and culturally since its inception. Many of
our pupils have reached great heights in the sport and academic field. The tradition to be the
best should be continued.
THE SCHOOL’ S VISION
TO PROVIDE AN EFFECTIVE WELL-BALANCED EDUCATION IN A MULTI-CULTURAL,
2
CARING AND SAFE ENVIRONMENT, MAINTAINING QUALITY IN ALL ASPECTS.
MISSION
TO WORK IN PARTNERSHIP WITH ALL STAKEHOLDERS TO EMPOWER STUDENTS
TO
DEMONSTRATE ACADEMIC EXCELLENCE, DISCIPLINE, RESPECT AND TOLERANCE
IN A NON- RACIAL ENVIRONMENT
THE MOTTO: "Nosce te ipsum" means "Know Thyself. This originates from the Oracle of
Apollo at Delphi in Ancient Greece.
3
SCHOOL LEADERSHIP COMPONENTS
THE SCHOOL GOVERNING BODY
The SGB is a Statutory Body established through prescriptions of the South African Schools Act. The SGB
performs its functions as stipulated in Section 20 of the South African Schools Act. Among other functions
performed are:
 promote the best interests of the school and strive to ensure its development through the provision
of quality education for all learners at the school.
 administer and control the school’ s property, buildings and grounds occupied by the school.
 establish posts for educators and non-educator staff members to ensure efficiency and excellence.
 establish partnerships with external institutions aiming to enhance the quality of education in the
school.
SCHOOL MANAGEMENT TEAM
The Schools Staff Establishment caters for the establishment of the School Management Team constituted
as follows:
 Principal
 Two Deputy Principals
 Head of Department : Afrikaans
 Head of Department : English
 Head of Department : Economics and Management Sciences
 Head of Department : Life Orientation
 Head of Department : Mathematics & Mathematics Literacy
 Head of Department : Arts & Culture/Dramatic Arts & Design Art
The School Management Team is responsible for the professional management of the school. Curriculum
management lies within the ambit of the SMT. The team ensures equitable distribution of duties among
educator staff members, monitor and control academic activities, develops the schools timetable,
administer assessment activities, reports learner performance to parents, the District Office and the
Provincial Department. Controlling all academic activities lies with the SMT.
EDUCATORS
We have a dynamic, qualified and caring group of professionals who have led the school through many
curriculum changes. The school is privileged to have the School Governing Body which employs extra
educators to augment the Department of Education’ s allocation. Educators are prepared to walk an extra
mile for each learner.
TEACHER LIASON OFFICER
The incumbent educator will be democratically elected by learners and educators. The TLO is
responsible for ensuring that the Representative Council of Learners (RCL) is accepted by the school
community. The TLO advises the student leadership in carrying out their responsibilities and lead
student fundraising activities.
ACADEMICS
THE SCHOOL IS A SECONDARY SCHOOL DIVIDED INTO TWO PHASES:
4
 GENERAL EDUCATION TRAINING PHASE (GET) GRADES 8 & 9
We are implementing National Curriculum Statement in grade 8 & 9 and offer the following learning
areas:
 Economic & Management Sciences
 Life Orientation
 Technology
 Mathematical Literacy, Mathematics & Mathematical Sciences
 Social Sciences
 Arts & Culture
 Natural Sciences
 Language Literacy & Communication
Learners will be afforded the opportunity to proceed to the next phase of secondary schooling provided
they have satisfied pass requirements in the GET phase.
 FURTHER EDUCATION TRAINING PHASE (FET) GRADES 10, 11, AND 12.
The school places focus firmly on academic achievement and offer learners an opportunity to choose
subjects they wish to study. When subject choices are made, career choices and abilities of learners should
be taken into consideration. Home Language, Life Orientation, and Mathematics Literacy or Mathematics are
compulsory subjects in FET. Learners are free to choose additional subjects from the following table to
complete their career choice:
The subjects are categorised into Learning Streams. Below are the Streams and Subjects that will be
offered at Dawnview High School.
1. LANGUAGES: English and Afrikaans
2. HUMAN and SOCIAL STUDIES: Geography, History, Tourism, and Life Sciences
3. PHYSICAL, MATHEMATICAL, Mathematics; Life Sciences;
LIFE SCIENCES: Physical Science
4. BUSINESS, COMMERCE, Computer Application Technology (CAT)
MANAGEMENT STUDIES: Accounting; Business Studies and Economics
CHANGING OF SUBJECTS
 A leaner may change a maximum of two subjects in Grade 10, provided this is done by the beginning
of the third term, subject to the approval of the Principal.
 A learner may change two subjects in Grade 11, provided this is done before 28 February subject to
the approval of the Principal.
 A learner may change one subject in Grade 12, provided this is done before 31 January.
FORMAL ASSESSMENT ACTIVITIES
All Formal Assessment Activities will be administered according to Departmental and Subject
prescriptions. All learners are required to perform formal and informal assessment activities. The
5
School’ s Assessment Policy will provide guidelines on the management of assessment activities.
ADDITIONAL SUBJECTS
The Department of Education lays down a minimum of 7 subjects to be studied in order to gain a
National Senior Certificate. However, additional subjects may be taken outside of normal school
hours.
CAREER OPPORTUNITIES
With proper guidance and understanding, learners may qualify to study for any of the following:
SOCIAL ART SCIENCES COMMERCE
Educator
Speech Therapy
Administrator
Psychologist
Lawyer/Advocate/Jud
ge
Entrepreneur
Personal Manager
Consultant
Human Resource
Management
Labour Relations
Journalism
Sociologist
Public Relations
Officer
Artist
Digital designer
Graphic designer
Fashion designer
Industrial designer
Web site designer
Musician
Choreography
Dancer
Photographer
IT Engineer
Engineer (Civil/Electrical/Chemical)
General Medical Practitioner
Bio-Medical engineer
Bio-Technologist
Forensic Scientist
Pharmacist
Dentist
Pharmacist
Architect
Astronomist
Dietician
Nursing
Radiography
Zoologist
Medical Practitioner (Specialists)
Anaesthetic
Psychiatrist
Paediatrician
Ophthalmologist
Obstetricician
Technologist
Technician
Architect
Quantity Surveyor
Land Surveyor
Metallurgist
Actuarial Science
Geology
Nature Conservationist
Computer Technician
Astrologist
Town planner
Horticulture
Auditor
Financial Advisor
Chattered
Accountant/Accounta
nt
Business Manager
Marketing Manager
Banking
Computer
Programmer
Production Manager
Salesman
SCHOOL UNIFORM
Pupils attending the school, must acquire the items of school uniform as listed below from the official
supplier and wear them at all times while attending school or official school functions.
6
Boys
(a) Official school blazer: green with black stripes, Dawnview High School crest on the pocket,
as supplied by the school stockists.
(b) Long grey flannels as supplied by the school stockiest. NO tapering of trousers is allowed.
(c) Plain black or grey belts.
(d) Long sleeved plain white shirts are worn with the school tie and blazer or jersey during
winter. This is optional for Summer. Summer shirts are white with the official school crest on
the pocket, available from the official stockists. Alternatively the winter uniform must be worn.
(e) The black and green official school tie is worn by pupils in Grades 8, 9, 10 and 11. A plain
green tie is worn by pupils in Grade 12.
(f) Socks are grey with two green stripes in the turnover. Plain grey socks may be worn with
long trousers.
(g) The jersey – Green with white and black stripes – available from the stockists.
(h) Only plain black lace-up school shoes may be worn (NO buckles). No exotic styles or fashion
shoes may be worn.
(i) Only plain black scarves may be worn. The official white scarf may only be worn by Grade 12
pupils.
(j) Shirts must be tucked in at all times.
Girls
Summer Dress
Grade 8-11
(a) White school shirt with Dawnview High crest and green skirt or grey slacks.
(b) If a jersey is worn under the blazer, it must be the official green school jersey.
 (c) White ankle socks, (Must be folded down)
 (d) Flat, plain black buckle (baby doll) or lace-up shoes.
Grade 12
(a) Grey pleated skirt
(b) White ankle socks, (must be folded down) or grey/black stockings
(c) Flat plain black buckle (baby doll) or lace-up shoes or black high heeled (747) shoes.
(d) No high heeled shoes may be worn with grey slack.
Winter Dress
(a) Grey ladies slacks as supplied by the stockist.
(b) Grey or white socks.
(c) Plain white long-sleeved shirt.
(d) Black and green striped tie for Grade 8, 9, 10 and 11.
(e) Plain green tie for Grade 12.
(f) The jersey is plain green with white and black stripes.
(g) Only plain black scarves may be worn by Grade 8, 9, 10 and 11. White scarves for Grade 12.
(h) Official school blazer: green with black stripes, Dawnview High School crest on the pocket,
as supplied by the official stockists.
 Any temporary deviation from regular dress will only be allowed after consultation with the
principal. The deviation must be requested by the parent in writing.
 A School blazer is optional for grade 8 and 9 learners. Tracksuit top may be worn instead.
GENERAL APPEARANCE FOR LEARNERS
A. Hair is to be kept natural, neat at all times. Plain or green bobbles, or elastic band,
clips, slides or combs may be used to tie back the hair. The hair colour is to be
natural and no coloured braids will be allowed.
B. Girls may wear one pair of round, plain gold or silver studs or small plain sleepers.
The sleepers or studs must be worn in first, bottom hole of the lobe. No chains or
7
bands of any kind may be worn. No rings, tongue studs, nose rings or studs in the
eye brow may be worn. No extra badges or lapel pins may be worn other than
recognised School badges.
A. No make-up will be permitted.
B. Nails are to be kept at reasonable length. Clear nail varnish is permitted. No false
nails or French manicures are permitted.
C. Boys may not wear any jewellery. Hair must be natural in colour and style. The final
decision rests with principal.
D. Boys must be clean shaven at all times.
E. Only the official School beanie may be worn by learners during winter. Beanies must
be removed when entering any classroom.
PHYSICAL EDUCATION / SPORTS DRESS CODE
Learners are expected to be dressed in proper sporting attire when involved in sporting activities
and or Physical Education Training.
Golf T-shirts with the following colours belonging to each house:
- Nari: red
- Inkwe: Yellow
- Tau: Green
- Tlou: Blue
 Black shorts for all learners
Track-suits: Black and green
STUDENT LEADERSHIP
TEACHER LIAISON OFFICER (TLO)
The incumbent educator oversees the election of student leadership.
LEARNERS DISCIPLINARY COMMITTEE
Learners are given the democratic right to elect learners to serve as prefects in the school. The Head
Boy and Head Girl and their deputies will represent the school in selected important functions. Their
primary aim is to:
 Promote discipline in the school
 Assist educators in enforcing the schools Code of Conduct
REPRESENTATIVE OF COUNCIL OF LEARNERS
The student body is afforded an opportunity to elect learners to serve in the student leadership
structures of the school. The RCL is given an opportunity to represent learner aspirations in the school
and the School Governing Body. The ethos of the Representative Council of learners is to:
 Promote non-prejudicial acceptance of cultural, ethnic, and religious diversity of all learners.
 Unite all learners and promote an ethos of mutual respect and ensure a safe environment for
teaching and learning.
 Promote co-operation between educators, parents, and educators.
8
OFFICIAL UNIFORM STOCKISTS
ADAM KARA
109 Rietfontein Road
Primrose
EXTRAMURAL ACTIVITIES
Learners with the potential to excel in cultural and sporting activities will be afforded an opportunity.
A healthy mind thrives well in a healthy body.
Sport facilities:
 Two soccer fields
 Four netball courts
 Two rugby fields
 Two cricket fields
 GYM hall
The school offers the following sporting codes to allow learners to develop physically for a healthy
mind to survive:
 Athletics
 Cross Country
 Hockey (Girls and boys)
 Boys soccer
All age groups accommodated
 Netball
 Basketball
 Table Tennis
 Cricket
Our sports teams are given an opportunity to participate in District and Provincial competitions.
Parents should support their children and cooperate with the school to make sport a success in the
school.
A healthy mind thrives well in a healthy body
PHYSICAL EDUCATION / SPORTS DRESS CODE
Learners are expected to be dressed in proper sporting attire when involved in sporting activities
and or Physical Education Training.
Golf T-shirts with the following colours belonging to each house:
- Nari: red
- Inkwe: Yellow
- Tau: Green
- Tlou: Blue
 Black shorts for all learners
Tracksuit: Black and green
CULTURAL ACTIVITIES
Dawnview actively encourages the development of all cultural activities in the school. Learners may
participate in any of the following:
9
1. Choir
2. Debating
3. Dramatics
4. Public Speaking
5. Christian Society
6. Cheer leading
Once a pupil has indicated that he/she will be participating in any activity, that pupil has made a firm
commitment and is expected to cooperate with educators managing such activities. Learners should
exercise self-discipline and a pride in our school.
AWARDS
 Academic
 Sport
 Culture
The following will be conferred as part of recognition:
 Certificates
 Diplomas
 Trophies
 Cash prizes
 Bursary
DISCIPLINARY MEASURES
The Schools Code of Conduct will be a guideline document dealing with ill-discipline in the school.
The document will be distributed to all parents and learners on admission to the school. Parents
will be notified about serious acts of misconduct which may lead to suspension or expulsion.
Disciplinary procedures are clearly spelt out in the Code of Conduct. All stakeholders are obliged
to respect and implement the stipulations of the Code of Conduct. Some of the aims of the Code
of Conduct are:
 The Code of Conduct aims to establish a disciplined and purposeful school environment,
which is dedicated to promoting and maintaining the quality of the learning process.
 To promote positive discipline, self-discipline and exemplary conduct.
 To provide a core of common values that should guide all activities of Dawnview High School
 To promote self-discipline through mutual respect, self-respect, honesty and integrity.
SCHEDULE 1 (SERIOUS MISCONDUCTS THAT MAY LEAD TO SUSPENSION)
A learner will be guilty of serious misconduct if he or she, intentionally and without
just excuse-
(a) Seriously threatens, disrupts or frustrates teaching or learning in a class;
(b) Engages in a conspiracy to disrupt the proper functioning of the school through collective
action;
(c) Insults the dignity of or defames any learner or any other person, which includes racist
remarks;
(d) Distributes, or is in the possession of any test or examination material that may enable
another person to gain an unfair advantage in a test or examination.
(e) Cheats in a test or examination or any other form of assessment such as assignments;
(f) Engages in any act of public indecency;
(g) Sexual harasses another person;
(h) Is found in possession of or distributes pornographic material; or
(i) Is under the influence or in the possession of alcohol.
10

SCHEDULE 2 (SERIOUS MISCONDUCTS THAT MAY LEAD TO EXPULSION)
A learner will be guilty of serious misconduct if he or she-
(a) Is found guilty of misconduct as contemplated in schedule 1 after having been found guilty of
the same or similar misconduct on two previous occasions;
(b) Fails to comply with a punishment of suspension as a correctional measure; or
(c) Intentionally-
(i) forges any document or signature to the potential or actual prejudice of
 the school;
(ii) trades in any test or examination question paper or in any test or
 examination material;
(iii) attempts to bribe or bribes any person in respect of any test or
 examination to enable himself or herself or another person to gain an
 unfair advantage therein;
(iv) engages in fraud
(v) engages in theft, or otherwise acts dishonestly to the prejudice of
 another person;
(vi) is in possession of, consumes or deals in any illegal substance or other
 harmful substance;
 (vii) is in possession of, uses or transmits narcotic or unauthorised drugs or
 on visible evidence of such possession, us or transmission;
 (viii) is in possession of a dangerous weapon;
 (ix) assaults or threatens to assault another person;
 (x) holds any person hostage;
 (xi) murders any person
 (xii) rapes any person; or engages in any sexual activity which amounts to an
 offence in law; or
 (xiii) maliciously damages property
SCHOOL TIMES
The academic school activities will start at 07:45 until 14h15. Educators are expected to knock off at
15h00 to accommodate administrative duties that may require their attention. Late coming will not be
tolerated and will be dealt with as prescribed in the Schools Code of Conduct. Learners must be
always at school and punctual for their lessons.
TUCK SHOP
The school runs a Tuck Shop as a service to pupils. Parents are however encouraged to make
learners healthy lunch boxes to avoid children to money related ill-discipline.
HOMEWORK DIARY
Pupils are expected to purchase a diary - the use of such assists pupils with time management and
self discipline.
ABSENTEEISM
This should be kept to the minimum - when a pupil returns to school a note / doctor's certificate must
be handed in on that same day.
COMMUNICATION
11
Different forms of communication are used to inform the schools community about school
developments:
 Parents evenings
 Reports concerning academic performance
 News letters
 Bulk SMS system
 Telephone calls
 Letters
 Open days
PARTERSHIP
We, the Parents, Teachers and Pupils, believe that everyone has the right to be an individual and everyone
has the right to be heard.
WE UNDERTAKE
 to be punctual on all occasions;
 to be co-operative and positive towards our academic school work;
 to uphold any commitment we make
 to conform to the rules of the school;
 to reduce absenteeism to the minimum;
 to adhere to the dress code;
 to be loyal;
 to exercise self-discipline;
 to be enthusiastic about our school's accomplishments;
 to rejoice in the honour others bring to our school;
 to abhor all forms of dishonesty;
 to be accountable for our actions and behaviour, and our short comings;
 to RESPECT one another at all times;
 we will strive for perfection in academics, cultural and sports,
Educators will become advocates of the brand, learner’ s ambassadors, the School Management
Team and the School governing Body, the leadership.
“ EDUCATION IS THE MOST POWERFUL WEAPON WHICH YOU CAN USE TO CHANGE THE
WORLD” Nelson Mandela
https://dawnviewhigh.co.za/dvh