1
DAWNVIEW CODE OF CONDUCT FOR LEARNERS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. TITLE OF THE POLICY....................................................................................................2
2. EFFECTIVE DATE……………….……………………………………………………………..2
3. DATE OF NEXT REVIEW……….……………………………………………..………….…...2
4. REVISION HISTORY…………………………………………………………….…………..…2
5. PREAMBLE………………………………………………………………………..…………….2
6.1 DEFINITIONS ………………………………………………………..………………………....2
6.2 ACRONYMS…………………..…….………………………………………………………..…3
7. APPLICATION AND SCOPE OF THE POLICY …………………………………………….3
8. LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK ………….….………………………………………………....3
9. RELEVANT POLICIES AND PROVINCIAL CIRCULARS..………….….………………….4
10. THE SCHOOL’S VISION…………………………………………….………………… ……4
11. MISSION STATEMENT AND SCHOOL MOTTO.…………………………………… …….4
12. PURPOSE OF THIS DOCUMENT…………………………………………………… ……..4
13. LEARNERS RIGHTS …………………………...………………..…………………… ……..4
14. LEARNERS RESPONSIBILITIES…………………………………………………… ……..4
15. RULES AND REGULATIONS………………………………………………………… ……..5
 15.1 SCHOOL ATTENDANCE …………………………………...…...……………… ….. 5
 15.2 SCHOOL UNIFORM……………………………………………………………………..5
 15.3 PHYSICAL EDUCATION / SPORTS DRESS CODE.……………..………….... .... 7
 15.4 GENERAL APPEARANCE………………………………………………………… … 7
16 RESPECT AND DIGNITY………………………………………………………………… …8
17 PROTECTING AND TAKING CARE OF PROPERTY………………………………… ....8
18 SPORTING, CULTURAL AND ACADEMIC ACTIVITIES……………………………… ....8
19 ACADEMIC ACTIVITIES……..………………………………………………………… ……9
20 THE REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL OF LEARNERS (RCL) AND SCHOOL
 LEADERS… ……………………………………………………………………………….….9
21 SCHOOL NOTICES…………………………………………………………………… ……10
22 ENVIRONMENTS……………………………………………………………………… ……10
23 CODE OF DISCIPLINE………………………………………………………………………10
23.1 GENERAL RULES …………………………………………………………………………..10
23.2 SCHEDULE 1 (SERIOUS MISCONDUCTS THAT MAY LEAD TO SUSPENSION)... 11
23.3 SCHEDULE 2 (SERIOUS MISCONDUCTS THAT MAY LEAD TO EXPULSION)…. 11
23.4 PROCEDURE FOR DISCIPLINARY ACTION AGAINST LEARNERS……………….. 12
23.5 DISCIPLINARY ACTION…………………………………………………………………….12
 23.5.1 CATEGORY A MISCONDUCT…….………………………………………….....12
 23.5.2 CATEGORY B MISCONDUCT.…………………………………………………..12
 23.5.3 CATEGORY C MISCONDUCT….……………………………………………….13
24 DISCIPLINARY HEARING…..……………………………………………………………….13
25 COVID MANAGEMENT……………..……………………………………………………….14
26 APPROVAL ……………………………………………………………………………………15
27 CODE OF ETHICS …………………………………………………………………………...15
28 ACCEPTANCE………………………………………………………………………………...16
2
1. TITLE OF THE POLICY: DAWNVIEW LEARNER CODE OF CONDUCT
2. EFFECTIVE DATE: 01JANUARY 2021
3. DATE OF NEXT REVIEW: NOVEMBER 2021
4. REVISION HISTORY
As amended on:
2019 November
Date of next review:
2022 November
5. PREAMBLE
In terms of the South African Schools Act (Act No 84 of 1996) hereafter referred to as SASA,
it is the duty and responsibility of the School Governing Body to develop and adopt a Code
of Conduct for learners. Such policy must be in line with the provision of the Provincial
Gazette, relevant National Education Legislation as well as the Constitution of the Country.
In a case where the Code of Conduct is in contrast with any provincial or national legislation
then such legislation shall take precedence.
6.1 DEFINITIONS
No Term Definition
1 District Director Is the officer of the department responsible
for the administration of education in a
particular educational district
2 Educator Means any person, excluding a person who
is appointed to exclusively perform
extracurricular duties, who teaches,
educates or trains other persons or who
provides professional educational services,
including professional therapy and
education psychological services at school.
3 Expulsion Means the permanent removal of a learner
from a school.
4 Grade Means that part of an educational
programme which a learner may complete
in one school year, or any other education
programme which the Member of the
Executive Council may deem to be
equivalent thereto
5 Head of Department Refers to the head of a provincial
department of education.
6 Learner Means any person receiving education or
obliged to receive education in terms of
relevant legislation.
3
7 Parent means –
a) the parent or guardian of a learner;
b) the person legally entitled to custody of a
learner; or
c) the person who undertakes to fulfil the
obligations of a person referred to in
paragraph (a) and (b) towards the learner’s
education at school.
8 Principal Refers to an educator appointed or acting
as the head of a school.
9 School Refers to Dawnview High School
10 School Governing Body The body responsible for Governance
issues at Dawnview High School.
11 Suspension Means the temporary refusal of admission
to a learner to a school, usually suspension
precedes expulsion.
6.2. ACRONYMS
No. Acronyms Explanation
1. DC Disciplinary Committee
2. MEC Member of Executive Council of a province
who is responsible for education in the
province.
3. RCL Representative Council for Learners
4. SASA South African Schools Act
5. SGB School Governing Body
6. SMT School Management Team
7. APPLICATION AND SCOPE OF THE POLICY
The policy shall apply to all learners registered in a school.
8. LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK
8.1 Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 (Act No. 108 of 1996), as amended.
8.2 South African Schools Act, 1996 (Act No. 84 of 1996), as amended.
8.3 National Education Policy Act, 1996 (Act No. 27 of 1996), as amended.
8.4 Promotion of Access to Information Act, 2000 (Act No. 2 of 2000).
8.5 Promotion of Administrative Justice Act, 2000 (Act No. 3 of 2000).
8.6 The Gauteng Schools Education Act, 1995 (Act No.6 of 1995).
8.7 Regulations for Misconduct of Learners at Public Schools and Disciplinary Proceedings,
 2001 (General Notice 2591 of 2001).
8.8 Regulations for Safety Measures at Public Schools Government Notice No. 1040,
 October 2001, as amended.
8.9 Guidelines for the Consideration of Governing Bodies in Adopting a Code of Conduct for
 Learners, General Notice 776 of 1998.
4
9. RELEVANT POLICIES AND PROVINCIAL CIRCULARS
Circular 74/2007
10. THE SCHOOL’S VISION:
To provide an effective well-balanced education in a multi-cultural, caring
environment, maintaining quality in all respects.
11. MISSION STATEMENT
Work in partnership with all stakeholders to advocate for excellence, discipline,
excellence in nurturing an African child.
11.1 SCHOOL MOTTO
 “Nosce Te Ipsum” meaning “Know Thyself”.
12. PURPOSE OF THIS DOCUMENT
 This code of conduct aims to establish a disciplined and purposeful school
environment, which is dedicated to promoting and maintaining the quality of the
learning process.
 The purpose of the code of conduct is to promote positive discipline, self-discipline,
and exemplary conduct.
 To clarify and promote the roles and responsibilities of various stakeholders in the
creation of a proper learning environment in the school.
 To provide a core of common values that should guide all activities of Dawnview High
School
 The Code of Conduct aims to promote self-discipline through mutual respect, selfrespect, honesty, and integrity.
 To provide insight to corrective measures aimed at rectifying behavioural problems.
 Should learners transgress or violate the code of conduct, they will be subjected to
relevant disciplinary procedures for learners.
 The Code of Conduct endorses the basic rights of teachers to teach and learners to
learn in an orderly and safe environment.
 Learners must be accountable for their behaviour and must accept the consequence
of any contravention of the Code of Conduct.
 Disciplinary action will be fair and appropriate. It will be aimed at corrective measure
and when necessary, will take into consideration the wellbeing of the school
community.
We the Learners believe that everyone has the right to be an individual and everyone has
the right to be heard.
13. LEARNERS HAVE THE RESPONSIBILITIES:
(i) To attend school regularly, to learn, and to work hard;
(ii) To cooperate respectfully with educators and fellow learners;
(iii) To adhere to the rules and Code of Conduct of the school;
(iv) To perform schoolwork diligently and submit Assessment tasks on time.
(v) To be accountable for their actions and behaviour;
14. LEARNERS HAVE THE RIGHT:
(i) To an equal, non-racial, non-sexist education;
(ii) To an education that will allow them to develop their talents;
(iii) To organised and well managed lessons;
(iv) To enjoy adequate recreational sports and educational facilities in a clean,
5
safe and drug-free environment;
(v) To be treated with respect and courtesy;
(vi) To fair discipline;
15. RULES AND REGULATIONS
15.1 SCHOOL ATTENDANCE
I. A learner who was absent should not return to School without a note signed by
the parent/guardian explaining his /her absenteeism and a telephone number
where the parent/guardian can be contacted.
II. A medical certificate is required after more than two day’s consecutive absence.
III. A learner who misses a formal assessment task, cycle test, formal assessment
task or exam must produce a medical certificate, or a zero mark (0) will be
awarded.
IV. No learner may leave the school premises early, except under special
circumstances, in which the parent/guardian must inform the office in writing prior
to leaving. The learner must be collected by the parent/guardian and signed out
in the front office. The staff may choose to verify the credentials of any person
collecting a learner from School.
V. Truancy-Any learner not adhering to 1.i will be regarded as truant or bunking and
parents will be notified.
VI. Punctuality
(a) Late coming is totally not allowed. Transport problems are not the
responsibility of the school.
(b) School hour’s start at 07:45 and ends at 14h15.
(c) When changing classes for the next period, learners must take at least 3
minutes and be seated for the next period when the second bell goes
off.
(d) Three consecutive late coming may lead to detention.
VII. Bunking of classes will not be tolerated.
VIII. Learners who legitimately leave a class during a lesson must be in possession of
a permission note indicating date, time, and reason for leaving the class. Only
one learner may leave the class at a time.
IX. Learners will be allowed to leave the premises only in extreme cases. Letter or
telephonic instruction from parents is required in case of illness of a learner. A
leaner must be collected from the front office and signed out by a parent. Cooperation of parents/guardians in this matter is essential.
15.2 SCHOOL UNIFORM
Pupils attending the school, must acquire the items of school uniform as listed below from
the official stockists and always wear them while attending school or official school functions.
If a long-sleeved article of clothing (shirt, blazer, and jersey) is worn, a tie is compulsory.
 A: BOYS
(i) Official school blazer: black with green stripes, Dawnview High School crest on the
pocket, as supplied by the school stockists.
(ii) Long grey flannels as supplied by the school stockiest. NO tapering of trousers is
allowed.
(iii)Plain black or grey belts.
6
(iv) Long sleeved plain white shirts are worn with the school tie and blazer or jersey
during winter. This is optional for Summer. Summer shirts are white with the official
school crest on the pocket, available from the official stockists. Alternatively, the
winter uniform must be worn.
(v)The black and green official school tie is worn by pupils in Grades 8, 9, 10 and 11. A
plain green tie is worn by pupils in Grade 12.
(vi)Socks are grey with two green stripes in the turnover. Plain grey socks may be worn
with long trousers.
(vii) The jersey – Green with white and black stripes – available from the stockists.
 (viii) Only plain black lace-up school shoes may be worn (NO buckles). No exotic styles
 or fashion shoes may be worn.
 (ix) Only plain black scarves may be worn. The official white scarf may only be worn by
 Grade 12 pupils.
 (x) A School Black Cap is optional
 (xi) Shirts must be always tucked in.
 B: GIRLS
 SUMMER DRESS
(a) White school shirt with Dawnview High crest and green skort or grey slacks.
* Skort must be a minimum length of 10cm above the knee when kneeling.
* May be worn with a school blazer and a green school jersey.
 (b) If a jersey is worn under the blazer, it must be the official school jersey and be worn
 with a tie.
 (c) White ankle socks, (Must be folded down)
 (d) Flat, plain black buckle (baby doll) or lace-up shoes.
 (e) Short sleeved green cardigan can be worn with a long or short sleeved shirt.
 (f) A School Black Cap is optional
 WINTER DRESS
(a) Black and Green Winter Jacket (Optional)
(b) Grey ladies slack as supplied by the stockist.
(c) Grey or white socks.
(d) Plain white long-sleeved shirt.
(e) Black and green striped tie for Grade 8, 9, 10 and 11.
(f) The jersey is plain green with white and black stripes.
(g) Only plain black scarves may be worn by Grade 8, 9, 10 and 11. White scarves for
Grade 12.
(h) Official school blazer: Black with green stripes, Dawnview High School crest on the
pocket, as supplied by the official stockists.
N.B. Any temporary deviation from regular dress will only be allowed after
 consultation with the principal. The deviation must be requested by the
 parent in writing.
 Matric Girls Uniform
(a) Plain green tie for Grade 12
(b) Matric girls may wear grey skirt or grey slacks.
(c) Grey skirt may be worn with flat black buckle or lace-up shoes.
7
(d) If high heels are chosen, it must be the 747-black shoe with a wide heel. The length
of the heel should be 5cm.
(e) The high heel shoes may be worn with black or grey stockings.
(f) No high heels may be worn with grey slacks.
(g) A white long-sleeved jersey or white cardigan may be worn.
15.3 PHYSICAL EDUCATION
Learners are expected to be dressed in proper sporting attire when involved in sporting
activities and or Physical Education Training.
Golf T-shirts with the following colours belonging to each house:
- Nare: Red
- Nkwe: Yellow
- Tau: Green
- Tlou: Blue
 Black shorts for all learners
School tracksuit available at local stockists.
15.4 GENERAL APPEARANCE
 A. Hair is to be always kept natural and neat:
A: Boys
i) No Mohawk
ii) No coloured hair styles
iii) No lines on the head
iv) Sideburns not to pass the ears.
v) No spikes, dreadlocks, or platted Hair.
vi) No gel to be used for the hair
vii) Natural hair, neat and well-trimmed hairstyles will be allowed.
ix) Boys may not wear any jewellery.
xi) Boys must be always clean shaven.
xii) Tapered trousers are not allowed.
xiii) School beanie may be worn by learners during winter. Beanies must be removed
 when entering any classroom.
x) School caps may be worn in Summer but must be removed upon entering a
 classroom.
xi) The School Golf T-shirt may not substitute the school white shirt. Golf T-shirts are
 only to be used for the PE component in Life Orientation or when requested during
 sporting activities. Golf T-shirt can be worn with a school tracksuit.
B: Girls
I) No coloured hairstyle
ii) Extensions should not go beyond the shoulders, if they do, the hair should be neatly
 tied at the back.
iii) If touching shoulders, the hair should be neatly tied at the back
iv) Long hairstyles can be tied in a bun
v) Green and black hair accessories for grade 8-11, and white for grade 12 will be
 allowed.
vi) Girls may wear one pair of round, plain gold or silver studs or small plain sleepers of
 which the diameter must not be bigger than 10mm. The sleepers or studs must only be
 worn in first, bottom hole of the lobe. No chains or bands of any kind may be worn. No
 rings, tongue studs, nose rings or studs in the eyebrow may be worn. No extra badges
8
 or
 lapel pins may be worn other than recognised School badges.
vii) No make-up will be permitted.
viii) Nails are to be kept at a reasonable length. Clear nail varnish is permitted. No false
 nails or French manicures are permitted.
16 RESPECT AND DIGNITY
16.1 Learners should always be polite and demonstrate good manners.
16.2 Visitors to our school should be treated in a courteous and respectful.
16.3 Learners should move quickly and quietly from class within the allowed timeframe
 and always keep left when walking. Learners will make way for staff coming along
 the passage and stairways.
16.4 Physical contact which may be construed to be sexually related is not allowed
 between learners.
16.5 No bullying, fighting or intimidation is allowed.
16.6 No racist, sexist, derogatory, or offensive remarks may be made.
16.7 Backchat, insolence, shouting, whistling, screaming, booing, jeering, spitting and
 other socially unacceptable behaviour will not be tolerated.
16.8 Dawnview learners are ambassadors of the school and should always display ethical
 conduct in public.

17 PROTECTING AND TAKING CARE OF PROPERTY
17.1 ‘School property’ includes the following:
17.1.1 The grounds and buildings occupied by the school, as well as any permanent
addition to such grounds and buildings.
17.1.2 All other property, including equipment, books, stock, motor vehicles and the
like that the school owns, rents or stores, or about which the school could be
held legally liable in case of any damage or loss.
17.2 All learners are obligated to do everything in their power to protect the school’s
 property for it to be utilised for the benefit of all current and future learners of
 the school.
17.3 No learner may remove any school property from the school grounds without the prior
 consent of the principal.
17.4 Learners may not handle, damage, mark, deface or destroy any property of the staff
 of the school, fellow learners, visitors to the school, or members of the public.
17.5 Any learner who deliberately misuses, damages or vandalises any school property
 shall replace or pay for such property. Destruction of and/or damage to property is a
 criminal offence.
17.6 Learners are responsible for their own property, before, during and after school. The
 school will not be held liable for loss or damage to learner’s property including
 cell phones.
18. SPORTING, CULTURAL AND ACADEMIC ACTIVITIES
18.1 Learners are expected to actively participate in the school’s extra-curricular
 programme.
18.2 Learners who are selected to represent the school as participants in any sports or
other extracurricular activities must be dressed in the sportswear, school wear or
other prescribed clothing as determined by the educator responsible for the activity
concerned, both during and after participation in such activity.
18.3 Although it is assumed that learners who participate in sports activities will do so with
9
commitment and dedication, such learners are expected to practise self-restraint and
self-discipline. No learner may display bad sportsmanship, use foul or offensive
language, get involved in fights or incidents, or engage in any foul or improper play.
18.4 All learners who participate in the activities shall be loyal to the
school and fellow participants. Participants must report promptly and on time at the
venue of the activity or the venue from where participants depart to the activity.
Learners who have been selected to represent the school in an activity may only be
excused from attendance only if a written apology is handed to the sports or cultural
head in advance. Unforeseen absence from an activity will only be accepted if the
Sports or Cultural head receives a written apology no later than three days following
the relevant activity.
18.5 Learners attending sports events as supporters and spectators must be dressed in
full School uniform unless otherwise informed. They shall also refrain from any
disruptive, improper, rebellious, unnecessarily inciting, or indecent behaviour.
Learners may not respond negatively to any ruling by an adjudicator or referee.
18.6 Learners, once committed to an activity, are expected to fulfil their commitments by
attending practises and matches.
18.7 School colours may be awarded to learners who attend all practise and games,
adhere to the School’s dress code and show impeccable behaviour.
19 ACADEMIC ACTIVITIES
19.1 There shall be always an orderly atmosphere in the classroom. Learners may not
disrupt or hinder teaching.
19.2 Learners should bring to school required stationery and textbooks on daily basis.
19.3 All learners must do their prescribed homework enthusiastically, diligently and with
dedication to develop a consistent work ethic. Failure to comply with this rule without
an acceptable excuse shall be regarded as a transgression of this rule.
19.5 All learners must do their prescribed homework and promptly return it to the relevant
educator by the due date. Failure to comply with this rule will be deemed a
transgression and necessary corrective measures will be taken.
19.6 Learners must actively participate in the learning process and must work consistently
during class time.
19.7 All Formal Assessment Tasks must be performed according to the Assessment
Plan and submitted on due dates. A medical certificate is required in the event
a learner is absent from school during the administration of a Formal
Assessment Task.
19.8 Learners have a duty to catch up any schoolwork missed.
19.9 All learners are obligated to adhere to rules and regulations for tests and
 examinations as prescribed by the Department.
19.10 Learners shall refrain from any form of dishonesty when tests and examinations are
conducted.
19.11 Parent’s meetings will be convened once per term when need arises.
19.12 Term Report Cards will be issued to parents to inform parents about the
academic progress of their children. Academic problems shall be discussed
with subject educators and parents have the right to request children’s
assessment tasks.
20 THE REPRESENTATIVE COUNCIL OF LEARNERS (RCL) AND SCHOOL
 LEADERS
20.1 All learners will participate in the election of the Representative Council for Learners.
20.2 All learners will respect the authority of the RCL.
10
20.3 The RCL in collaboration with the staff-members, are responsible for general school
discipline.
20.4 RCL members should bring learners who have transgressed to the attention of staff
members.
20.5 All learners will obey any reasonable instruction from a member of the RCL and
should always strive to support and cooperate with the RCL and other school
leaders.
20.6 RCL members will be available to assist the school to usher in visitors into the school
premises during school functions or when the school hosts departmental gatherings.
21 SCHOOL NOTICES
21.1 All learners are obligated to hand to their parents all school notices and newsletters.
Learners should timeously submit return slips to their homeroom educators.
22 ENVIRONMENTS
22.1 Learners have the right to a safe environment and school that are conducive to
education.
22.2 Learners may not litter on school grounds, school premises and outside the
 school yard.
22.3 Learners who attend any school activity as spectators or supporters are expected to
leave the grounds they have occupied in a neat and clean condition and must ensure
that all litter is picked up and placed in garbage bins.
22.4 Learners must leave restrooms in a clean state.
22.5 The attachment of slogans (graffiti), stickers, posters to any surface at the school is
strictly prohibited, unless it is done with the principal’s consent.
22.6 Learners will comply with any reasonable instruction from the principal, any educator,
RCL or LDC member or another school leader about maintaining a clean and
hygienic school environment.
23. CODE OF DISCIPLINE
23.1 General Rules
23.1.1 Full School Uniform must be worn to school, at school functions and always when
leaving the school grounds.
23.1.2 Learners must adhere to all school policies on school attendance and punctuality.
23.1.3 Learners must strictly stick to the ‘Keep Left’ policy when changing classes. (Keep on
the left of the white line painted on the floor of the corridors and staircases.)
23.1.4 Incitement and intimidation of learners to become members of any
organisation without the consent of parents will constitute serious act of
misconduct.
23.1.5 No learner may leave School in the afternoon via the car gate.
23.1.6 No learner may drive or park a motorcycle/vehicle on School premises without
permission. Vehicles must be registered at the office and the driver must be in
possession of a valid driver’s licence.
23.1.7 No vandalism and an act of arson is categorised as a ‘Schedule 2 offence.
23.1.8 Learners may not tamper with Fire Extinguishers or Fire hoses.
23.1.9 Schools are smoke-free zones according to national legislation.
23.1.10 No learner may use profane language (swearing).
23.1.11 No learner may display insolence, backchat, or insubordination by word or
 action.
23.1.12 No learner may use any form of discrimination against another learner or member
11
 of staff. Xenophobia is considered discrimination.
23.1.13 Eating or chewing gum in class is not allowed.
23.1.14 Water bottles are not allowed in class.
23.1.15 Cell phone brought to school by learners must be switched off during
 teaching and learning. Cell phone shall be confiscated when disturbing
 teaching and learning and will only be collected at the end of the term.
 However, a confiscated cell phone may be released at a payment of R 300.00.
 No cell phone theft cases will be investigated.
23.1.16 No ball games may be played on both the East and West quads or within range of
 buildings and cars.
23.1.17 No learner is allowed to sell food, sweets, and or any substance without
 permission.
23.1.18 Only authorised entrance and exit points will be used by all learners.
23.1.19 No learner may receive visitors during break or communicate with a visitor through
 the boundary fences.
23.1.20 Learners are ambassadors of the school and should at all times strive to behave
 in a disciplined manner, even when they have left the school premises.
23.1.21 No one will take a video of any activity in the school without permission. Cell phones
used for such will be confiscated.
23.1.22 Any material and or attire undesirable will be confiscated. The confiscated item will
 not be returned to the owner.
23.1.23 The principal or his delegate may at random, search any group of learners,
 administer a urine test for drugs, if a reasonable suspicion has been
 established. (Section 8A of SASA)
23.2 SCHEDULE 1 (SERIOUS MISCONDUCTS THAT MAY LEAD TO SUSPENSION)
A learner will be guilty of serious misconduct if he or she, intentionally and without
just excuse-
(a) Seriously threatens, disrupts, or frustrates teaching or learning in a class.
(b) Engages in a conspiracy to disrupt the proper functioning of the school through
collective action.
(c) Insults the dignity of or defames any learner or any other person, which includes
racist remarks.
(d) Distributes, or is in the possession of any test or examination material that may
enable another person to gain an unfair advantage in a test or examination.
(e) Cheats in a test or examination or any other form of assessment such as
assignments.
(f) Engages in any act of public indecency.
(g) Sexual harasses another person.
(h) Is found in possession of or distributes pornographic material.
(i) Is under the influence or in the possession of alcohol.
23.3 SCHEDULE 2 (SERIOUS MISCONDUCTS THAT MAY LEAD TO EXPULSION)
A learner will be guilty of serious misconduct if he or she-
(a) Is found guilty of misconduct as contemplated in schedule 1 after having been found
guilty of the same or similar misconduct on two previous occasions.
(b) Fails to comply with a punishment of suspension as a correctional measure; or
(c) Intentionally-
(i) forges any document or signature to the potential or actual prejudice of
 the school.
(ii) trades in any test or examination question paper or in any test or
12
 examination material.
(iii) attempts to bribe or bribes any person in respect of any test or
 examination to enable himself or herself or another person to gain an
 unfair advantage therein.
(iv) engages in fraud.
(v) engages in theft, or otherwise acts dishonestly to the prejudice of
 another person.
(vi) is in possession of, consumes or deals in any illegal substance or other
 harmful substance.
 (vii) is in possession of, uses or transmits narcotic or unauthorised drugs or
 on visible evidence of such possession, use or transmission.
 (viii) is in possession of a dangerous weapon.
 (ix) assaults or threatens to assault another person.
 (x) holds any person hostage.
 (xi) murders any person.
 (xii) rapes any person; or engages in any sexual activity which amounts to an
 offence in law.
 (xiii) maliciously damages property.

23.4 PROCEDURE FOR DISCIPLINARY ACTION AGAINST LEARNERS
In case of a violation of any provision prescribed in the code of conduct for learners, this
disciplinary procedure is to be followed. To enforce this disciplinary procedure, misconduct is
divided into three categories. These correspond with the various disciplinary steps that could
be taken and the various procedures that could be followed in handling misconduct.
Criminal behaviour will be referred to the nearest Safety and Security Agency and parents
will be notified immediately.
23.5 DISCIPLINARY ACTION
23.5.1 Category A misconduct
 (General Rules: 23.1.1, 23.1.2, 23.1.5, 23.1.10, 23.1.13, 23.1.14, 23.1.17, 23.1.18)

Discipline must be maintained by all educators and relevant authorities to ensure that the
education of learners proceeds without disruptive behaviour and offences. An educator has
the right to control and discipline learners violating the schools code of conduct by imposing
the following sanctions to address minor violations:
a) A written warning
b) Supervised schoolwork that will contribute to the learner’s progress at school as well
as improve the school environment, provided that the parents are informed timeously
and the child’s safety is ensured
c) The performance of tasks by the transgressor in favour of the person/institution who
has been wronged by the transgression.
d) Suspension from participation in school activities, such as sports and cultural
activities (excluding social events)
e) Issuing of demerits to the offender
23.5.2 CATEGORY B MISCONDUCT
 (General Rules: All covered in category A will fall here when repeated, 23.1.4,
 23.1.7, 23.1.9, 23.1.10, 23.1.19, 23.1.20.)
13
Serious acts of misconduct will be handled by the Head of Discipline, Deputy Principals, and
the Principal who are entitled to impose the following sanctions:
a) Any of the sanctions in 23.5.1(a) to (e) above, to which the following could be added.
b) Exclusion from participation in social events of the school.
c) Enforced affordable compensation.
d) Repair or replacement of damaged property.
e) Community service of up to six hours.
f) Putting offenders on detention.
23.5.3 CATEGORY C MISCONDUCT
 (General Rules and Regulations number 23.1.4 to be treated as Schedule 2)

Serious misconduct which threatens the welfare and security of other learners must be
referred to the principal. The principal may provisionally suspend the learner from the time
charges of serious misconduct have been laid against a learner until the results of a fair
hearing of a disciplinary committee have been finalised if in the opinion of the principal it is in
the interest of the school community. In this case, the SGB will conduct the disciplinary
hearing within 5 days. The principal may refer serious violations to the Governing Body,
which will convene a disciplinary hearing. Following a hearing in which any learner is found
guilty of violating the provisions of the Code of Conduct, the Governing Body may impose
provisions as indicated in Category A or B, suspend the learner, or recommend for the
expulsion of the learner from the school to the Head of Education.
23.5.3.1 Should the principal opt for the suspension of the learner; the learner will be
 suspended not more than 5 school days.
23.5.3.2 Should the governing body opt for suspension as the only sanction, they may
suspend the learner for up to seven school days.
23.5.3.3 Should the Governing Body decide to recommend to the Head of Education
that the learner be expelled, the Governing Body may suspend such learner
for a reasonable period of up to fourteen school days, pending the Head of
Education Department’s decision.
24 DISCIPLINARY HEARING
24.1 Preliminary Inquiry
When a learner is suspected or alleged to have committed a major transgression, the
school principal may after evaluating evidence decide whether a disciplinary hearing
is warranted.
24.2 Hearing
24.2.1 The Principal will draw up a charge sheet, and the parents and learner will receive
written notice of the charge and the date, time, and venue of the hearing. These
arrangements must be made in consultation with the disciplinary committee.
24.2.2 The notice must contain sufficient information on the date, place, and nature of the
alleged transgression.
24.2.3 At least five school days must lapse between the delivery of the notice and the
hearing.
24.2.4 The governing body shall appoint the disciplinary committee. The chair of the
committee must be a governing body member. The disciplinary committee will have
the power to take charge of and finalise the disciplinary hearing, as if it has been
done by the governing body themselves and shall be entitled to do everything that
the governing body may do in terms of applicable legislation, including imposing and
enforcing any sanction, and recommending expulsion to the Head of Education.
14
24.2.5 The learner must be assisted by his/her parent or a person appointed by the parent.
In case of major transgressions, the learner is entitled to apply for representation by
a legal representative or any person who is appointed by the parent of the learner.
Such application must be directed to the chair of the disciplinary committee at least
two school days before the start of the hearing. No other persons, apart from those
mentioned above, may attend the hearing on behalf of the accused learner.
24.2.6 Learners who are involved in disciplinary proceedings will also be entitled to receive
support, advice and counselling from educators who have been appointed for such
purpose by the school principal or the governing body, provided that such educator
may not assist the learner at the disciplinary hearing, unless the parent of the learner
authorises the educator to do so.
24.2.7 Should the learner and/or his/her parents and/or representative fail to attend despite
proper notification, the hearing may proceed in their absence.
24.2.8 The hearing must be fair and just and shall be conducted in terms of the prescripts of
the applicable provincial legislation. The prosecutor and learner (or the learner’s
representative on behalf of the learner, if applicable) must be afforded the opportunity
to put their case, may put questions to witnesses, may call witnesses, and may
scrutinise or table documents related to the matter.
24.2.9 The members of the disciplinary committee themselves will also be entitled to call
witnesses, request additional witnesses or testimony, put questions to the witnesses,
or investigate or have investigated further any aspect that could promote fairness and
justice.
24.2.10 After testimony has been heard, the committee will decide whether the learner is
guilty or innocent. For this purpose, or for the purposes of settling any dispute that
may arise during the proceedings, the committee will be entitled to adjourn for a
reasonable period to consider its ruling. Such consideration will occur behind closed
doors and may be attended by committee members only.
24.2.13 Should the learner be found guilty; both the learner and the prosecutor will receive
another opportunity to testify and/or make representations on extenuating and
aggravating circumstances that the committee needs to consider imposing an
appropriate sanction. To consider an appropriate sanction, the committee will be
entitled again to adjourn for a reasonable period. Such consideration shall occur
behind closed doors and may be attended by committee members only.
24.3 Findings and Sanction.
24.3.1 In case of a guilty finding, the disciplinary committee’s ruling, including the imposed
sanction, must be communicated in writing to the learner and his/her parents as well
as the prosecutor within a maximum of five school days.
25. COVID -19 MANAGEMENT
Dawnview High School will adhere to the ‘Standard operating Procedures’ for the
prevention, containment and management of COVID-19.
 Access to the school will be limited to learners, educators, and support staff
members. Visitors and parents will only be allowed into school premises per
appointment or on request by school authorities.
 all people entering the school will be screened and sanitised by personnel allocated
for such duties at the gate.
 only people wearing a face mask will be allowed to enter the school premises.
 All persons entering the school must fill in a COVID-19 register.
 maintain a social distance of at least 1.5 to 2 meters with others, where possible.
 every learner, staff member and visitor must always wear a cloth mask.
 avoid direct contact with others e.g. shaking hands or hugging;
 frequently wash hands with water and soap.
15
 avoid touching the face (i.e. eyes, nose, mouth) with unwashed hands;
 The school will use one entrance and exit point which will be controlled by gate
controllers from 7h00 until 8h00.
 Learners whose temperature reading is above normal will be placed in an isolation
room (Room 1.3), retested, and their parents called to come and collect them.
 Learners with multiple symptoms related to COVID-19 must stay at home and seek
medical attention. Such learners when noticed, their parents will be called
immediately to collect them.
26 APPROVAL
TITLE NAME SIGNATURE DATE
Principal Mr. M. Kolokoto
SGB Chairperson Mr. M. September
Department of Education Ekurhuleni North
27 CODE OF ETHICS
I hereby solemnly commit myself to the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, and
undertake to respect, comply with, and promote the law and the legal system.
I commit myself to:
 adhere faithfully to the Learner Code of Conduct and all the rules and regulations of
Dawnview High School.
 maintain high moral and ethical standards.
 strive for conduct that is always responsible and that does the school credit.
 do my schoolwork diligently, conscientiously and with dedication; and
 display the necessary courtesy and respect towards all staff, fellow learners, parents,
and visitors.
 display acceptable ethical behaviour in all public platforms.
16
28. ACCEPTANCE OF THE SCHOOL’S LEARNER CODE OF
CONDUCT
A: LEARNER
I ____________________________________________ subject myself
to respect and adhere to the Learner’s Code of Conduct. I shall adhere
to any disciplinary measure should I fail to comply with any provision or
measure contained in the School’s Learner Code of Conduct.
SIGNED AT…........................................ON THIS .................DAY
OF…….....................2022.
_________________________
LEARNER
B: PARENT:
I ____________________________________ parent of
_____________________________acknowledge receipt of a copy of
the School’s Learner Code of Conduct and pledge to respect and honour
its content.
SIGNED AT…........................................ON THIS .................DAY
OF…….....................2022.
_________________________ ___________________
PARENT CONTACT